okay I've been looking forward to doing
this video for a long time now here it
is finally
the new long-awaited Spitfire
what
new graphics gotta wait for the new
graphics
okay hold on
I have an idea
the all-new Spitfire from axis it what
new bags gotta wait for the new bags
ah thank you at last right here we go
finally the Spitfires or a roll film
[Music]
so here it is the final version of the
access Spitfire and just like those
World War II fighter planes as I've just
shown I'm pretty sure that this Spitfire
is also going to become pretty well
regarded in terms of its maneuverability
um so before I go into the uh the shape
and the design let's just have a quick
look at the the full range this is the
um oh by the way the new bags well worth
the weights really really nice uh the
780 the h4c the 900 the 960 the 1030 and
the biggest in the range being the 1100s
now the six foils in that range
um covers a very very wide range of
conditions and user weight and skill
level
um the idea isn't for everyone to get
every single size obviously
um but they are close enough for people
to be able to pick the size or sizes
that's exactly right for them their
weight their skill level the conditions
that you're riding them in the foiling
disciplines that you're going to be
using them for
um so there's a lot of Versatility
within that range which I think is
really nice
um
okay let's have a quick look at its uh
shape so you can see from its outline
this is obviously why it's been called
the Spitfire because of the elliptical
shape to the uh to the outline of the
wing
um it's got a nice deep cord
it's quite a thin foil section and
there's a very slight curve going on
throughout the whole uh span there no
sudden downturns no twists and the final
thing I want to point out is this
straight median line so if you draw a
straight line from one wing tip all the
way to the other wingtip that straight
line there is where the thickest part of
the foil is along and as such those
design characteristics all go towards
giving the foils their performance
characteristics and for the Spitfire
first and foremost it is a performance
surf foil 100 that's what it's designed
for it also does a hell of a hell of a
lot of other things really really well
but I've got some really specific things
to say about that which I'll deal with
in a minute now to help me
um to keep this orderly and hopefully to
stop me from Rambling too much I've got
a list here on a mini whiteboard that's
just off to the side of the camera so if
you see me glancing to the side I'm just
trying to keep myself on track and to
keep the waffle to a minimum
okay so as a surf foil the first thing
is as I've just said it's
maneuverability it's amazing it really
is I cannot tell you how good this foil
feels to Surf it's just so maneuverable
and so lovely at how it's uh it
transitions Rolexes is amazingly smooth
um and as you go down the sizes they
become incredibly reactive and fast and
easy to change direction on their role
axis
um they're very very predictable and
very smooth
um very stable and balanced in all forms
of turning and you can carve them super
hard
um a nice fast carve
um but you can also do those super
Snappy real tight sort of cutbacks and
and slashy turns and they just
absolutely thrive on it you can do them
all day long and there's such balance
and control when you're doing there's
never that I've come across apart from
user error from myself there's I've
never detected any sort of
um any wobble or any sort of dropouts
um or anything that can interrupt the
flow of the turn or whatever I'm doing
pitch control is amazing
I've never had to think so little about
my pitch control when I'm using the
Spitfires and that's not just when I'm
gliding it's when I'm carving it's when
I'm at speed no matter what I'm doing
it's almost like the Spitfire is helping
me out to control the the pitch there's
no sudden wobbles there's no sudden
dropouts
um just like with
uh the maneuverability and the Turning
where it's it's all very nice and
balanced very smooth
um no hidden nasty surprises pitch
control is amazing even at supersonic
speeds if you're going down the the wave
face or or carving off of the wave
um and you know you pick up some speed
when you do those Maneuvers
um the pitch is so nice and smooth
um you you hardly have to think about it
at all it just like I say it just helps
you out
in terms of foot pressure they've got
quite a neutral feel a very good balance
between front and back foot pressure
if anything
um there's slightly more back foot
than front foot pressure needed to uh to
fly these foils
um I mean you can tune this to uh to
your style if you uh you know choose a
certain fuse like the advanced fuses
um tend to provide a feeling of needing
less front foot pressure they reduce the
amount of front foot pressure that you
need to apply
um but generally speaking the Spitfires
are a little bit more sort of back foot
than they are 100 neutral
um but they do feel very very well
balanced I don't come off the water
feeling like my my back leg is is
completely worn out
um but having said that if you want to
push through a turn hard with your back
threats they can handle doing that as
well it feels really nice to be able to
have the option of of either keeping
your your foot pressure neutral through
terms or driving hard off your back foot
um so that's another really good thing
about the Spitfires it's really
impressed me the versatility that you
can have with the style of of your your
surfing
they handle wing tip reaches so well
it's ridiculous like my riding skill
level isn't at the point where I can do
wing tip reach after wingtip breach
without causing me to crash until I got
the Spitfires literally I'm not kidding
with previous foils
I could cope with the odd one or two
every now and again
um but I would always have to take you
know evasive action emergency sort of
measures you feel the winter breach
happen and I I know what to do now in
order to try and save it can't always
save it but I can occasionally
um but the first time I did a wingtip
breach with uh with the spit throw it's
a Spitfire 900 on Wave face I I briefed
the wingtip and I went oh oh well that
just happened and it was like I almost
felt because I tensed up when it
happened expecting to have to go into my
normal sort of emergency procedures
um to try and save it
but that didn't have to happen and I
carried on and then it happened again
and it was like okay and then the third
time it happened it was just like well
this is crazy easy you don't have to do
anything it literally just happens and
then it it just sort of
yeah it just carries on like it didn't
happen
um so yeah as long as you've got some
angle to the foil when it happens then
you literally you you barely feel it
even when there's very little angle I
still feel like they they deal with them
better than any other foil that I've
I've ever ever used
um okay now another really cool feature
about Spitfire is how well it handles
speed oh my goodness me okay now
how fast is the Spitfire that's a really
good question
um faster than the HPS but not as fast
as the art foils
thing so get getting back to speed I
think I was you see rambling sorry look
at my list yes I was definitely on speed
so
um
faster than the HPS not as fast as the
Arts but the point is that they can
handle being maxed out and still feel
like
total control like you're not going to
overfoil you're not gonna
um you know just get chucked off or you
know just end badly pumping the
Spitfires I have found needs quite a
different technique or at least a
significant change to my pump technique
to get the best out of pumping the
Spitfires
when you're pumping a big foil or a high
aspect foil like the Arts quite often
I'm I'm doing those sort of sharp Taps
and standing quite upright and I'm
keeping the boards quite flat to the
water and I'm I'm
able to keep the speed up and keep high
on the masts and that's the efficient
way of doing it
um
with the Spitfires
it's less about keeping the board flat
more about not pumping at a high angle
of attack so by pumping with the nose up
they absolutely hate that they'll stall
the middle kill the speed and you'll
stall very quickly
um so to combat that what you do is just
a little bit of a Down up a little bit
of a Down up
so not a great big porpoising motion you
know changing the angle of attack
drastically like you would do with say a
low aspect ratio foil but you are still
trying to initiate each pump with a
little bit of a a downward angle
um so a little bit of front foot
pressure and then immediately back foot
pressure but not bringing the angle of
attack too high as you go up so
that sort of
down sharp but not for very long and
then up and you want to Glide
on that
um on that part of the pump
now to help with that Glide and to
maintain your speed
I found that it's much better to jump up
rather than push down with each pump so
with the big fours you can push down and
you know that sort of real you know
muscling through each pump maybe that's
not the best technique but that's what I
do
um but with this
I found that
if you unweigh yourself you maintain
speed and you can get really nice Glide
at the top of each pump so what I do is
I spring up and as I've sprung up I then
bring my knees up to my chest and I
bring my shoulders down to try and meet
my knees so I'm pivoting at the hips to
compress my body
um and
by lifting up my knees to my chests at
the top of the pump so once I've sprung
up and then I'm bringing my knees up to
my chest
that's helping to prolong the period of
time that I'm that I've unweighed myself
from the board
and then you sort of gently put your
weight down on the board and then you
spring back up again
and it's that constant what I've got
going through my mind is that constant
feeling of this unweigh myself for as
long as possible so I spring up and
unweigh myself trying to stay as light
as I can for as long as I can
um and staying high on the Mast that to
the space of the bottom third of the
Mast being in the water is The Sweet
Spot and I know that's a sweet spot for
all foils and the most efficient parts
of the Mask to be pumping on for all
fours but with a Spitfire it just seems
to make so much more difference than
other foils
so it really is that much more important
to stay high in the Mast
um if you do that you can maintain your
speed and the Glide is much better you
come down
um with your board closer to the water
and you really notice that it's suddenly
so much harder to keep the the you keep
your speed up
um but this is the other really good
thing about pumping the Spitfires I find
that you can if you're willing to expend
a short burst of energy in say two three
or four series Power pumps
told me and then you can really you know
exaggerate that down up motion
um to get high up on the Mast again
then the Spitfires actually respond to
that quite well
um not saying that I can always recover
and they know we're near as easy to
recover from that sort of
um
mistake or that sort of you know you
can't dig yourself out of the hole as
easily with a Spitfires as you can of
the PNG foils the PNG files pump and
glide as the name implies that's what
they're all about and they are the
easiest to pump out of a hole if you
make a mistake
um but you can recover from uh from
those sorts of errors with the Spitfires
whereas other foils I tend to find like
the HPS They Don't Really stall and drop
out as such
they just get lower and lower and lower
and slower and slower and slower and
until the board's on the water
um and I find it very difficult to
recover once once a year you've lost
height on the Mast and you've lost speed
which happens quite quickly and easily
with the HPS
um I find it very difficult to recover
without expending so much energy that
I've just got nothing left once I've got
higher higher on the mass
um and the Arts obviously you know they
do drop out once you you lose their
speed they stall
um more suddenly than the Spitfires
winging right
um for winging
I have very specific requirements and
most of those are met by the art foils
because I love the speed and glide for
winging
um I think they carve really nicely the
art foils and I love being able to push
forward when I'm winged down winding
um when I'm paddle down and then prone
down meaning I love to be able to push
forward
um and I never thought anything would
tempt me away from the art foils in
terms of winging and downwinding but now
I have to admit there are specific
conditions where I will actually choose
the Spitfires over the art foils
um and that's that's actually quite
something for me so what are those
conditions well
um let's have a think about downwinding
both winging and pro not paddle
downwinding
um the swell would have to be very peaky
so
um tall short period swell would be
really acceptable
um
slow moving as well so wind generated
swell or Bay runs are probably good
conditions for downwinding with a
Spitfires if it's fast moving low swell
those low fast moving rollers that you
get from Ocean soil ground swell then
the Spitfires just aren't fast enough
they can't cope with the speed and
because
if it's low swell especially you you
can't really get that
um you can't generate speed from carving
uh Because by the time you've tried to
carve to generate speed that that fast
as well has moved on underneath you and
it's just I found it it just wasn't any
fun
um other people will or may have
different opinions but for me personally
if the swell is fast I would definitely
be on the Arts
um if I say if you've got that slower
moving definitely more peaky then yes I
would I would definitely consider the uh
the the spit for us
um
what else in winging would I use the
spit visor for well if I'm just using
the wing to convey me around
um to catching small to medium-sized
waves then yeah the Spitfire can be an
absolute bundle of fun because they are
so good at just
carving I
super tight turns slashing the the wave
face
um really tight hard fast Maneuvers
whereas the art foils if it's fast
moving swell I would still go with the
art and they carve beautifully don't get
me wrong they carve at speed really
really nice but
short sharp quick hard turns
um I think the Spitfires outperform the
art foils and if the conditions are
suitable for doing that sort of thing I
would choose the Spitfires
um
over the Arts but then the Arts
definitely for those faster rollers
they certainly have more lift than the
Arts comparative size for sizing and
that's something I don't want to get
into comparing things but I just find
that the Spitfires are really easy to
get on foil whereas the Arts you have to
work
to get on foil you can pump them up
whereas the Arts you have to build up
your speed and just Glide up
um the Spitfires are a little bit more
forgiving and a little bit early lift
that sort of thing so um easier to get
up on foil okay so for the final part of
the video yeah we've finally got there
um I want to try and answer the question
who are the Spitfires for well the
Spitfires are not for beginners in my
opinion
um they are for people who already have
a reasonable level of
um skill you don't have to be an expert
to access them or to use them by any
means but I would say that they are too
performance orientated despite their
user friendliness I would say that
they're user friendly for people with an
amount of skill beginners until they
reach a certain level are going to find
them
um just like say two performance
orientated and it'll hold you back
until you have the ability to control a
foil you need to uh just I think you'd
be better off sticking to either the BSC
or the HPS
um they are also not for people who uh
want the speed and glide of an art foil
they are not as fast and they do not
Glide as well as the Arts
um they're also not for people who want
the ease of pump of the PNG series they
just don't
pump at the same low speeds their stall
speed is higher than the pngs so they're
not going to be as easy to pump it's
still fun to pump
um
but you could put more effort into and
be more precise with your pump technique
than when pumping the PNG foils
um so as you would expect from a high
performance surf foil they are for
people who want to take their Surf game
to the next level
um whether it's prone foiling subfoiling
um using down winding for you know more
of a more of a sort of surf style than
than that sort of faster Speedy pushing
forwards type style
um
uh they're for Wingers who have access
to waves but I would still say maybe not
those fast rollers
um I think with a smaller uh you know
the the 840 and the 780 even those would
be fun when winging so yeah maybe
because just I haven't tried that yet I
haven't
done wind foiling with these two small
Spitfire sizes on fast moving rolling
swell
um but like I say any form of Surfing
they are absolutely just the best I've
ever used
um right so that's it thankfully we've
come to an end for this time
um if anyone's got any questions please
do fire them away I'll do my very best
to answer
um so yeah until the next time
have a good time in the water